---
tags: posts
layout: pages/post
title: Leaving Twitter
date: 2023-01-08T12:00:00-07:00
excerpt: The current state of Twitter and how I'm responding to it.
---

# Leaving Twitter

```timestamp
```

If you're reading this at the time of posting, you know exactly what I'm going
to say and why. If you're reading from the future some context might be helpful.
(Also, has Linux taken over yet? It's the year of the Linux desktop now right?)

Elon Musk took over Twitter and has put the company into a tailspin to put
things charitably. In his short tenure there he has managed to:

*   Bring in external devs to do forced code reviews of the entire company to
    gauge performance.
*   Fire at least half the staff.
*   Cause several outages of varying severity.
*   Promote "free speech" by banning Twitter accounts which he personally
    disagrees with.
*   Make major policy decisions via Twitter poll.
*   Disband content moderation council and lie about it.
*   Break Twitter verified labels multiple times.
*   Publicly harass employees.
*   Reinstate numerous banned accounts, notably including Donald Trump.

## The Technical Stuff

Elon seems to have absolutely no idea what kind of company he bought and what to
do with it. I would laugh at all this if it weren't so depressing. There's a lot
of stupid decisions he's made, but I think it all comes down to the fact that he
doesn't understand what a social media company is. He looks at everything
through the realm of an engineer trying to solve a _technical_ problem (how do
we serve tweets efficiently), not as a leader trying to solve a _social_ problem
(how do we incentivize people to have positive human interactions).

Twitter's source code and its infrastructure is the easy part. "Easy" should be
read in _gigantic_ air quotes of course. Scaling anything to support hundreds of
millions of users is absolutely difficult, and Twitter is no exception. However
as a social media company, the focus of its leader needs to be on making the
platform accessible, supporting disadvantaged users, and defining moderation
policies. When building a social platform, the "platform" is the straightforward
part, it's the "social" where things get complicated.

[Nilay Patel](https://twitter.com/reckless) put it best in
[Welcome to hell, Elon](https://www.theverge.com/2022/10/28/23428132/elon-musk-twitter-acquisition-problems-speech-moderation)
(emphasis mine):

> The essential truth of every social network is that **the product is content
moderation**

Say what you will about Jack Dorsey's Twitter, at least he seemed to understand
this key point. Twitter leadership historically focused a lot of attention on
defining content policies, empowering moderators and building a moderation
council, handling abuse, supporting disadvantaged users, etc. It was never
perfect for sure and Twitter certainly made missteps along the way. However it
always came across as at least _trying_ to do the right thing. Twitter always
recognized that content moderation is both _important_ and _nuanced_, two things
Elon still fails to grasp.

Elon loves to tout "free speech" as the motivator for everything that he does.
Most of his reasoning sounds great on the surface to me, an affluent caucasian
heterosexual male. But of course, my experience in social media and the
privilege I have as someone who never once had to block someone yields a very
different perspective than many other Twitter users. I at least understand that
not everyone has my experience. I can see people who _do_ have to block others
and the harm which motivates them to do so. This is where policies like
mass-unbanning or "anything that's legal is allowed" cause very real harm for
users.
[Mike Masnick's content moderation speedrun article](https://www.techdirt.com/2022/11/02/hey-elon-let-me-help-you-speed-run-the-content-moderation-learning-curve/)
article does a much better job than I can of breaking down how complicated "free
speech" really is and demonstrates a nuanced understanding of the topic Elon
clearly lacks.

It's worth remembering that Twitter has had financial problems long before Elon
took over. Twitter has never really been sustainable and was always dependent on
investors. Jack Dorsey himself has
[publicly regretted](https://twitter.com/jack/status/1562861302242226178) that
Twitter became a company in the first place, so it's quite possible it was
doomed the moment it incorporated. Despite that, it is still absolutely fair to
criticize Elon for buying the company seemingly as a joke without any coherent
strategy for what to do with it. So far, Elon's solution seems to be to lay off
half the staff, drive off most of his advertisers, and break verified branding
so people pay $8 to fix it. Elon may not have created these problems, but they
are the problems he adopted when he purchased the company. Yet he seems to have
no idea what to do about them and is flying by the seat of his tweets.

Also, this might seem petty given that I don't work for Twitter, but Elon just
seems like the world's worst boss. Mass layoffs with seemingly no compassion for
affected employees, making major policy decisions by Twitter poll, bringing in
Tesla employees to code review Twitter employees, changing his mind on an hourly
basis, publicly arguing with employees about infrastructure, etc. I usually
don't care too much about big tech executives. As a current Google employee, I
can say that decisions Sundar Pichai makes are so far removed from what I deal
with on a day-to-day basis as to be near meaningless. I feel similarly about
most major executives and I don't typically judge a company or my desire to work
there based on its C-level execs. But Elon is absolutely a CEO I would _never_
want to work for (maybe Zuckerburg too).
[Rod Hilton put it best](https://mastodon.social/@rodhilton/109572674700288958):

> He talked about electric cars. I don't know anything about cars, so when
people said he was a genius I figured he must be a genius.
>
> Then he talked about rockets. I don't know anything about rockets, so when
people said he was a genius I figured he must be a genius.
>
> Now he talks about software. I happen to know a lot about software & Elon Musk
is saying the stupidest shit I've ever heard anyone say, so when people say he's
a genius I figure I should stay the hell away from his cars and rockets.

Even beyond these subjective philosophical concerns, Elon's takeover has led to
very real and practical concerns about security and privacy. Can Twitter's users
trust the company to secure their data and keep their information private given
the massive amount of layoffs, churn, and general turmoil at the company? Does
current Twitter feel like a safe and secure place for your information? Does
Elon seem like the kind of guy who would encourage developers to take the time
to properly security review the PR which breaks the verified checkmark?

## The Political Stuff

I typically try to avoid talking too much about politics publicly, mainly for my
own mental health. However I personally have a red line about sharing a platform
with the... _everything..._ that Donald Trump represents. In particular, as of
today Trump has faced little to no personal accountability for his hundreds (?)
of scandals and particularly for attempting to _overthrow the government_. As of
today he is yet to be indicted for anything and while his political power has
certainly weakened (largely because of his bans from social media IMHO), he is
still a very real contender for the 2024 presidential race.

Being kicked off social media was arguably the biggest consequence he has faced
up until now and Twitter arguably led that effort in the immediate aftermath of
January 6th. Rolling that back and letting him back onto the platform feels like
it is reverting the smallest shred of accountability he has faced up to this
point.

As of today, Trump has not actually activated the account, claiming he would
rather use his own platform "Truth Social". Personally I can't see that site
ever getting the kind of reach he would demand and sooner or later he'll come
back to the bird, but that's just my speculation. Whether he returns or not is
irrelevant to the fact he has regained what little privilege was taken from him.

I could go on, but I really don't want to and this is why I try to avoid
politics. The key point is that I personally refuse to share a platform with
Donald Trump (whether he participates or not), and inviting him back to the
platform was when I knew I no longer wanted to be a part of Elon's Twitter.

## What's Next?

Well if it wasn't obvious from the rest of this post, I'm deactivating my
Twitter account. This is a decision from a number of root causes stemming from
Elon's takeover. It started with bringing Trump back onto the platform, to being
a terrible boss in every way, to no longer trusting the company with my
security.

I'm not really much of a social media person, and Twitter for me was always
about the community I wanted to be a part of. I created my account shortly after
joining the Angular team as I wanted to be more involved in open source
software, particularly web developers. Twitter was always just a means to that
end, and I'm more interested in following that community wherever it goes.

Over the past few months, I've seen a bunch of people in this community
migrating to [Mastodon](https://joinmastodon.org/), whether fully or partially,
and I made the jump myself to
[@develwithoutacause@techhub.social](https://techhub.social/@develwithoutacause).
Ultimately moving communities between platforms is very messy. It's a slow
process, different people are looking for different things, and
[communities are infinitely fractal](https://xkcd.com/1095/). However I've seen
enough of my follows moving to Mastodon and had enough positive experiences with
the platform to see a healthy and thriving community there for anyone interested
in joining.

While the user experience is very similar to Twitter, the culture is noticeably
different. People tend to be more active and engaged, boost interesting content
due to the lack of ranking algorithms, and be less focused on a "topic of the
day about dunking on the stupid person doing a stupid thing." While the
community is definitely smaller, I still get about the same amount of engagement
on Mastodon as I do on Twitter, and generally higher quality in my opinion.
Also, there's a solid number of people I previously followed on Twitter whom
I'm pretty sure did not follow me back, but have decided to follow me on
Mastodon. I'm not sure how much of this is just people becoming acquainted with
the new platform and how much is a result of distinct cultural differences.
We'll have to see how things shake out in the future.

### So is Mastodon the future?

Ultimately I'm joining Mastodon in order to stay connected with the open source
and web development communities. While Mastodon does meet my needs, I do have a
number of concerns as to the long term health of the ecosystem.

First, I don't see a sustainable financial model for maintaining Mastodon
servers right now. Twitter solved this problem mainly with advertisements, but
Mastodon explicitly rejects ads and everything is largely self-funded or handled
via donations. This can be good enough for hobbyist instances or small
communities, but is far off from the hundreds of millions of users Twitter was
successfully serving. This problem ultimately reduces to the more general
problem of open source sustainability, which is still a major challenge in the
industry with no clear answer.

Donations are great, but have yet to take off as a sustainable mainstream
business model on the internet, and I don't see that changing in the immediate
future. Maybe it's because I work for an advertising company, but personally I'd
be totally fine if a server showed ads and that made enough revenue to keep the
service free. The current state of ad-funded social networks serves as an
existence proof that many users are comfortable with that as an idea. However, I
expect that the OSS community behind Mastodon would likely have strong
philosophical objections about such an approach. I can absolutely see the
ad-based monetization model weaken as the the legal landscape around user
privacy evolves, so maybe online culture will slowly shift and Mastodon is
actually ahead of the curve. Hopefully the diversity of servers and people in
this space will find the right sustainability model for them, but I've yet to
see anything which really seems like a clear success. All that said, please toss
a coin to your server admins.

Second, Mastodon seems to have a contradiction between "small tight-knit
community" and "global social network". This is best exemplified by the way
severs work. The server you pick is really important because it's the community
you're associating with, the moderation policy you're agreeing to, the
infrastructure you want to see sustainable, and the maintainers you're trusting
with your security and privacy. But also the server is completely _unimportant_
because you can change it at any time, see content from any other server, or
even host your own server with your own rules.

There's a fundamental contradiction here about what the server _represents_ to
its community. From a practical perspective I personally feel like the server is
mainly the infrastructure serving my traffic and also the domain attached to my
Mastodon handle. I can't associate a name or face with my server admin because I
see Mastodon as a "global social network", but there are absolutely others who
do know their server admins and have direct conversations with them about
moderation decisions and other topics of the day.

Compare this to Slack, Discord, or a subreddit where the community tends to be
tightly focused on a particular topic and have certain expectations about the
members of that community. I can go to the DragonBall FighterZ subreddit and
post `5L5L2M5M JC 5L5M5L2H SD 5L5M5L2H JC 5LL236L 236MH` and people actually
know what I'm talking about. Meanwhile the same thing in programming subreddit
looks like a language made up from scratch for code golfing.

Twitter is at the opposite end of the spectrum where communities are much more
ambiguous and focused on individuals rather than well-defined communities. Users
follow other users directly and hashtags only loosely link specific topics or
ideas.

Exactly where Mastodon fits into this spectrum is still unclear to me. That's
not necessarily fatal or even a bad thing. Maybe we can find the best of both
worlds. Or maybe different users will have different expectations of each other
and lead to unproductive conflict. I don't really know, it's just an aspect
which has confused me and I don't think I have a good answer for it right now.

Thirdly, I don't really see clear user-facing benefits to decentralization in
Mastodon. This is a bigger problem with the blockchain community, but that's a
whole separate blog post. I have a pet peeve about "decentralization" as a
selling point. **Decentralization is not a feature. Decentralization is an
architectural choice.** Don't sell me on how decentralized your product is, sell
me on the _features_ which are enabled by your decentralized architecture that
make you better than centralized alternatives. "You can pick a server with
moderation policies you like" or "you can own your server and be protected from
a power-hungry admin" are features enabled by decentralization, sell me on
those, not the mythical "decentralization" bullet point.

Does decentralization allow Mastodon to provide more value for users than other
social networks? If there was ever a reason to choose a decentralized social
network, Twitter's implosion was it. "Leave a crazed power-hungry admin" is
quite literally the exact reason I'm leaving Twitter. Even this blog was heavily
inspired by
[Scott Hanselman's "own your words" mantra](https://www.hanselman.com/blog/your-words-are-wasted),
something more relevant now than ever. However, I'm not the average user and the
product designer in me still sees more complexity and downsides for the typical
user in a decentralized system like Mastodon than a centralized one like
Twitter. I'm just personally not convinced this is a significant improvement in
Mastodon's favor.

I don't want to be too negative about all this, there's a lot to like about
Mastodon. I love the culture of adding alt text to everything, I could see
myself running a server for my own identity, and the community has been overall
quite welcoming.

I could go on baselessly opining about Mastodon, but this post is already way
longer than I expected and I'm still learning myself. So instead, let's wrap
this up by baselessly opining about Twitter!

### Is Twitter's Dead?

Despite Elon's best efforts to the contrary, I do think Twitter will stick
around for quite a while. It's simply too big and too ingrained in the current
internet culture to disappear overnight. The vast majority of brands,
celebrities, public figures, and influencers will weather the storm and keep on
tweeting without all that much change.

Even MySpace still exists today. But like MySpace, social media networks tend
not to die spectacularly. They die a death of irrelevance. They die when the
cultural conversation moves on and people stop thinking about it or only think
about how dead it is. That may eventually happen to Twitter, and it will be
interesting to look back at Elon's takeover with the benefit of hindsight. Was
it the start of Twitter's death spiral? Did it save or delay Twitter's death?
Was Twitter doomed from the beginning?

Will Mastodon take over? I highly doubt it. People find their communities
organically and through their existing relationships. Twitter's spiral will
probably have more impact for TikTok, Discord, and whatever the next big social
network will be than Mastodon. That said, Mastodon doesn't need to be the
biggest social network to be successful and provide the value people are looking
for, and I do feel it will many meet users' needs there. The open source and web
dev communities in particular seem to have found a home there.

## Looking Forward

Ultimately the people, communities, and relationships we've built are all still
here, just a bit jumbled up now. Life goes on and I'm eager to move on from all
this.

I was actually planning to delete my Twitter account for a good month or so, but
held off as I decided to make a public archive of all my tweets now available at
[tweets.dwac.dev](https://tweets.dwac.dev/). Shout out to
[Zach Leatherman](https://www.zachleat.com/) and everyone involved in
[Tweetback](https://github.com/tweetback/tweetback) for enabling this archive,
as well as various tools for exporting, managing, and cleaning up raw Twitter
data (no alt text by default, seriously?!).

Moving forward, you can mostly find me on Mastodon at
[`@develwithoutacause@techhub.social`](https://techhub.social/@develwithoutacause).
My new year's resolution is to post more consistent content on my blog here as
well, so look forward to an end of year post about how I failed to do so.
There's also a new [social](/social/) page here listing out everywhere you can
find me. I just started a
[YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/@develwithoutacause) too and published
my first video on [HydroActive](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zL0TzFY6aj0).
I'm hoping to take advantage of that channel for more cool web dev content in
the future.

I hope to see you around, in whatever community we happen to cross paths.
